Best practices for an inclusive and welcoming conference (#527)
cncf/tag-contributor-strategy: deaf-and-hard-of-hearing/event-organizers/conference-best-practices.md

# Best practices for an inclusive and welcoming conference

If you're not familiar with the needs and preferences of deaf and hard of hearing (deaf/hoh) individuals, hosting a conference that is truly inclusive and accessible can feel overwhelming. This document will guide you to ensuring that deaf and hard of hearing attendees can fully participate in your event and have a great overall experience.  

> The first step of being more inclusive is understanding that deaf/hoh are not a one-size-fits-all group — we have different needs and preferences. Please refer to the [understanding the diverse needs of deaf and hard of hearing individuals](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1FQHbPP2asgp7NlCTXpjmhrARaXzCjN-DUogG4Ycf0xM/edit#heading=h.i8sn2yg7swqw) article to learn more about our community. You'll see why it is important to provide multiple options for deaf/hoh. If we can't participate, we will likely not return, reinforcing the vicious cycle of deaf/hoh individuals not participating in the community. We want to change that and need your help!

Author: We'll probably have to remove the language with the Google Docs link until we have that on the repo too.

> To make the process as straightforward as possible, we've listed everything that would make a conference truly inclusive but also included alternatives if a particular accommodation is not feasible. If you have any questions or concerns, please get in touch with us at cncf-tag-contributor-strategy@lists.cncf.io. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make the process as straightforward as possible, we've listed as much as we could to make a conference truly inclusive to our community but also included alternatives if a particular accommodation is not feasible. If you have any questions or concerns, please get in touch with us at cncf-tag-contributor-strategy@lists.cncf.io. 
```

> To make the process as straightforward as possible, we've listed everything that would make a conference truly inclusive but also included alternatives if a particular accommodation is not feasible. If you have any questions or concerns, please get in touch with us at cncf-tag-contributor-strategy@lists.cncf.io. 

Reviewer: How do these emails actually get routed to the WG?

Author: These emails go to everyone who signed up for the [TAG CS mailing list](https://lists.cncf.io/g/cncf-tag-contributor-strategy). Rob and Destiny, and everyone interested should probably sign up.

**Note**: This document is open source. If we missed anything, please submit a pull request or issue so we can update it — thank you! 

In this document, we'll cover:

> - [Website, registration, and CFP form](#website-registration-and-CFP-form)

Author: Don't think this is working. If anyone could help, I'd greatly appreciate it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Website, registration, and CFP form](#website-registration-and-cfp-form)
```

>  [Pre-conference best practices](#pre-conference-best-practices)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Pre-conference best practices](#pre-conference-best-practices)
```

>  [Day of best practices](#day-of-best-practices)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Day of best practices](#day-of-best-practices)
```

>     - [Reserved seating](#reserved-seating)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Reserved seating](#reserved-seating-at-the-front)
```

    - [Sign language interpreters](#sign-language-interpreters)
    - [Captions](#captions) 

>     - [Microphones for speakers and Q&A](#microphones-for-speakers-and-Q&A)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [Microphones for speakers and Q&A](#microphones-for-speakers-and-qa)
```

    - [Be ADA compliant](#be-ada-compliant)
    - [Meeting point area](#meeting-point-area)
- [Conference networking opportunities](#conference-networking-opportunities)
- [Ideas to be tested](#ideas-to-be-tested)

> ## Website, registration, and CFP form {#website-registration-and-CFP-form}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Website, registration, and CFP form
```

### Event website

On the registration and call for papers (CFP) pages, state that accommodations will be made for speakers and attendees with disabilities. Clearly and prominently stating that will make us feel welcome and motivate us to participate. Don't bury that important information in a registration form we might never see. Here's some suggested copy:

>     Interested in attending or speaking but require special accommodations? Please inform us through the registration or CFP form about your specific needs, and we will make every effort to provide the necessary support. For accommodation-related questions, please reach out to [accommodations@yourevent.com](mailto:accommodations@yourevent.com).

Author: This should be indented. The preview seems to think differently.

Reviewer: How about a quote block instead?

```suggestion
> Interested in attending or speaking but require special accommodations? Please inform us through the registration or CFP form about your specific needs, and we will make every effort to provide the necessary support. For accommodation-related questions, please reach out to [accommodations@yourevent.com](mailto:accommodations@yourevent.com).
```

### Registration and CFP form

Include a field asking if accommodations are needed (yes/no) and a free-form text box to specify. Everyone's needs differ; it's hard to discern from a fixed form/dropdown.

## Pre-conference best practices 

### Reach out to attendees/speakers before the event

* Set up notifications or monitor registration and CFP forms for accommodation needs and ask for clarification if needed.
* Connect attendees with sign language interpreters to ensure they understand communication needs and style.
* For dedicated interpreters (see sign language interpreter section), provide both sides with contact information to communicate directly during the event should they run late or if a meeting place changes.  

### Connect us with our peers

Provide a way for deaf and hard of hearing attendees and speakers or people with other disabilities to connect for peer support and potentially pool resources (e.g., event Slack channel). 

## Day of best practices

Needs vary. Interpreters, captions, or both may be necessary for different individuals.

### Reserved seating at the front

> Have some reserved seating at the front for deaf and hard of hearing attendees. Many rely on lipreading, so you want to be sure they can see the speakers well. 

Author: Updated

##### Networking events

As mentioned in the [conference networking opportunities section](#conference-networking-opportunities) below, networking is one of the key reasons people attend conferences, so be sure interpreters are also available during networking sessions. 

When it comes to networking events outside of the official program (e.g., sponsor happy hours), try to find a way to fund interpreters, too. If you can't use the conference budget, consider creating a sponsorship add-on to fund networking interpreter services. Don't underestimate the importance of these valuable opportunities. 

#### Regional/single-track conferences 

It's easier to share accommodations among speakers and attendees at smaller or single-track conferences. Provide live captions and a pair of sign language interpreters.

If your budget is tied, consider offering an **accessibility sponsorship add-on **and mention throughout the conference that interpreters are made possible thanks to that company. That will motivate them or other companies to participate next time. 

#### Local and community events

> For local and community events where attendance is free or low-cost, we recommend offering an accessibility sponsorship add-on (see prior section) to try to have interpreters on site. If that doesn't work, live captions are certainly the minimum you should offer. Consider bringing a tablet as a backup. [any tech suggestions?]

Author: We need suggestions for tech that might help with communication.

Reviewer 2: As a note - I use automatic captioning quite a lot, and I push my tools pretty hard. I can put together some thoughts on this, but perhaps it should be a separate document or added in a follow-up PR?

Depending on the automatic captioning tool, I believe some of them have T&Cs about not using them for public performance situations. I've been evaluating an OSS solution for Linux/Mac that, AFAIK, does not have that issue.

I think the Fedora design community did a virtual conference earlier this year that included some talks with captions, let me reach out to them and ask about it; they might have some ideas that would be useful for virtual/in-person conferences.

@JonZeolla I'm probably going to hit you up on Slack for info about the solution you're using, since I am trying to push one of our local tech conferences to do more on captioning too. :)

Author: Ok, should we just leave it at "If that doesn't work, live captions are certainly the minimum you should offer. Be sure to let the deaf attendee know before the event that you couldn't raise funds for interpreters and that, unfortunately, only captioning will be provided. Also, offer a refund if desired." 

 They should be apologetic about it. But it's a reality that they may not have the funds.

You could also try to incentivize the employer of the deaf attendee to pay for the interpreters and offer to list them as an official event sponsor. 

### Captions

There is no need to provide interpreters for every session, but set up captions for all. That will give attendees the flexibility to join a session spontaneously. While there are lots of live captions software options, not all work well. Using a tool with low accuracy can be very confusing for deaf/hoh individuals, so select one that has proven to work for us. 

> Keep in mind that, for a deaf person whose preferred form of communication is sign language, captions won't help when they want to ask a question or participate in a conversation with the speaker(s). You will need an interpreter to support interactions. 

Author: Yes! We should add all options. Can you write a little blurb on how that would work and what kind of tool can be used? Don't know enough about it.

> Keep in mind that, for a deaf person whose preferred form of communication is sign language, captions won't help when they want to ask a question or participate in a conversation with the speaker(s). You will need an interpreter to support interactions. 

Reviewer: I have only heard about these tools I've never used one.  But conceptually it makes sense.  Perhaps we just slot it for a future addition; where do we track those, issues on this repo?

> Keep in mind that, for a deaf person whose preferred form of communication is sign language, captions won't help when they want to ask a question or participate in a conversation with the speaker(s). You will need an interpreter to support interactions. 

Author: Yeah, create an issue and add the deaf/hoh tag.

> Some caption tools work for virtual events only, others for in-person and virtual. We've created a [list with different vendors ](https://docs.google.com/document/d/13rYZIXMlMSpdbu2wYVzgShj7ZwiXEjOX5nwZLp0PV50/edit#heading=h.ngl0kcvzm9ym)for your convenience. 

Author: to be removed before merging if we don't have a PR for this yet

Having the opportunity to network with hearing peers is not only important for the individual, it also helps break down prejudices and change attitudes towards us. These one-on-one connections are invaluable for fostering inclusion overall. So please be sure to allow your deaf and hard of hearing attendees and speakers to participate. 

## Ideas to be tested 

Technology is constantly changing, creating new, potentially more cost-effective, opportunities for inclusion. In this section, we'd like to capture ideas we have not seen in action yet but believe that could work. If you have an idea or have tested any of these at an event, please validate or correct our setup recommendations. You can either submit a pull request, raise an issue, or send an email to 	[cncf-tag-contributor-strategy@lists.cncf.io](mailto:cncf-tag-contributor-strategy@lists.cncf.io) with the requested change — thank you! 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> [TODO]

Reviewer: ?

> [TODO]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

# Best practices for an inclusive and welcoming conference

_This is a living document, so please be sure to check regularly for updates._

> If you're not familiar with the needs and preferences of deaf and hard of hearing (deaf/hoh) individuals, hosting a conference that is truly inclusive and accessible can feel overwhelming. This document will guide you to ensuring that deaf and hard of hearing attendees can fully participate in your event and have a great overall experience.  

Author: ```suggestion
If you're not familiar with the needs and preferences of deaf and hard of hearing (deaf/hoh) individuals, hosting a conference that is truly inclusive and accessible can feel overwhelming. This document will guide you to ensuring that deaf and hard of hearing attendees can fully participate in your event and have a great overall and complete experience.  
```

> The first step of being more inclusive is understanding that deaf/hoh are not a one-size-fits-all group — we have different needs and preferences. It is important to provide multiple options for deaf/hoh. If we can't participate, we will likely not return, reinforcing the vicious cycle of deaf/hoh individuals not participating in the community.  

Author: ```suggestion
The first step of being more inclusive is understanding that deaf/hoh are not a one-size-fits-all group — we have different needs and preferences. It is important to provide multiple options for deaf/hoh. If we can't participate, we will likely not return, reinforcing the vicious cycle of deaf/hoh individuals not participating in the community.  

It is important to provide attendees, speakers, and sponsors the opportunity to specify their accessibility needs as soon as possible, so you can plan for it in advance. Use your website, registration and call for papers forms to get that information early. Conference organizers often don't budget for accessibility until a request is made. This can create uncomfortable situations for event planners who don't know how to budget for a sudden request. Accessibility is rarely a static budget line item, and it can be hard, especially when planning it for the first time. One of our aims in documenting best practices is to learn and share cost information to make planning more predictable.
```

To make the process as straightforward as possible, we've listed as much as we could to make a conference truly inclusive to our community but also included alternatives if a particular accommodation is not feasible. If you have any questions or concerns, please get in touch with us at cncf-tag-contributor-strategy@lists.cncf.io. 

We encourage you to include the A in your DEI efforts: **Diversity + Equity + Inclusion + Accessibility (DEIA)** — all too often is our community an afterthought. We want to change that and need your support!

**Note**: This document is open source. If we missed anything, please submit a pull request or issue so we can update it — thank you! 

In this document, we'll cover:

> - [Website, registration, and CFP form](#website-registration-and-cfp-form)

Author: ```suggestion
- [ADA coordinator/specialist role](#ada-coordinator-specialist-role)
- [Website, registration, and CFP form](#website-registration-and-cfp-form)
```

- [Pre-conference best practices](#pre-conference-best-practices)
- [Day of best practices](#day-of-best-practices)
    - [Reserved seating](#reserved-seating-at-the-front)
    - [Sign language interpreters](#sign-language-interpreters)
    - [Captions](#captions) 
    - [Microphones for speakers and Q&A](#microphones-for-speakers-and-qa)

>     - [Be ADA compliant](#be-ada-compliant)

Author: ```suggestion
```

    - [Meeting point area](#meeting-point-area)
- [Conference networking opportunities](#conference-networking-opportunities)
- [Ideas to be tested](#ideas-to-be-tested)

> 

Author: ```suggestion
## ADA coordinator/specialist role

We recommend appointing a designated Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) coordinator to handle any prompt communications involving accommodations before and during the conference. This includes communication with attendees, speakers, facilities, and other event organizers.

### Be ADA-compliant

While nearly all buildings in the United States are ADA-compliant, we often see a gap at conferences: risers/stages generally don't have ramps, making them inaccessible for people with physical disabilities. Carpets make it harder for wheelchair users, physically and battery draining. Provide assistance when asked and have charging stations available.
```

> ## Website, registration, and CFP form

Author: ```suggestion
## Website, registration,  CFP form, program information
```

We also recommend providing attendees, speakers, and sponsors the opportunity to specify their accessibility needs as soon as possible, so you can plan for it in advance. Use your website, registration and call for papers forms to get that information early. Conference organizers often don't budget for accessibility until a request is made. This can create uncomfortable situations for event planners who don't know how to budget for a sudden request. Accessibility is rarely a static budget line item, and it can be hard, especially when planning it for the first time. One of our aims in documenting best practices is to learn and share cost information to make planning more predictable.

To make the process as straightforward as possible, we've listed as much as we could to make a conference truly inclusive to our community but also included alternatives if a particular accommodation is not feasible. If you have any questions or concerns, please get in touch with us at cncf-tag-contributor-strategy@lists.cncf.io. 

In this document, we'll cover:

> - [DEIA: Diversity + Equity + Inclusion + Accessibility](#deia-diversity-equity-inclusion-accessibility)

Author: @JonZeolla, can you help me here? Why aren't these links working? Looks like the same thing you did?

Reviewer: No problem
```suggestion
- [DEIA: Diversity + Equity + Inclusion + Accessibility](#deia-diversity--equity--inclusion--accessibility)
```

> - [ADA coordinator/specialist role](#ada-coordinator-specialist-role)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ADA coordinator/specialist role](#ada-coordinatorspecialist-role)
```

> - [Website, registration and CFP form, and program information](#website-registration-and-CFP-form-and-program-information)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Website, registration and CFP form, and program information](#website-registration-and-cfp-form-and-program-information)
```

#### Global or national conferences 

If you only have a few deaf individuals attending, provide two interpreters per individual (they always come in tandem for engagements longer than one hour). Wherever the deaf person goes, they'll follow. This will allow deaf individuals not only to attend sessions, but also network with their peers, walk the showfloor and talk with vendors. This is particularly important if they are the only or one of a few deaf people attending, as any interaction is contingent on the availability of an interpreter.

Of course, this approach doesn't scale well. If you have more deaf attendees, you'll need to share accommodations among more individuals. 

Before the conference, ask attendees to sign up for sessions in advance so you know which sessions must be staffed by interpreters. But allow for last-minute changes and be prepared to inform interpreters about these. While you'll want to plan ahead, you also want to offer attendees the flexibility to change their minds. Maybe they met someone who's giving a talk, and they'd like to attend that session. If you have multiple deaf attendees, have interpreters at keynotes by default. 

##### Accommodation desk

> Set up an accommodation desk and/or communication channel where attendees can ask questions, request changes, or get an interpreter spontaneously, if available. 

Reviewer 3: Set up an accommodation desk and/or communication channels where attendees can ask questions, request changes, or get an interpreter spontaneously, if available. **Be sure to staff it with people familiar with deaf/hoh needs and have assistive technology available to assist with communication when needed.**
